---
layout: post
title: Bavaria
category: travel
tags: ['Europe 08/09']
galleries:
    Bavaria: 'https://photos.app.goo.gl/3P3UksjLcFmkfxw1A'
---

I stayed in Munich only briefly, bundled up against the surprisingly cold
weather and more inclined to relax than to rush about the city from sight to
sight.
For the first time on this trip, I stayed at a "party hostel", sharing a dorm
with four college boys who, although very friendly, were also intent on
drinking heavily and loudly all night, making it difficult to get a good
night's sleep.
Oh well.
I recovered by spending many hours lounging and dozing on hammocks and
beanbags in an enclosed courtyard inside the hostel, a welcome respite from
the bitterly cold streets.

Despite this sloth-like laziness, I did venture out several times to see what
Munich had to offer.
Munich is the capital Bavaria, a south-eastern state of Germany that is home
to lederhosen, yodelling, beer halls and the infamous Oktoberfest.
Accordingly, one of my first stops was Hofbr채uhaus, one of the oldest and most
famous beer halls in Munich.
Having been heavily bombed by the Allies in World War II, Munich was
completely rebuilt, faithfully adhering to the prewar streets and the original
architectural styles.
The Hofbr채uhaus building is a testament to this desire to retain the original
city's character, taking more than a decade to be restored.
Interestingly, it was also the venue where, on the 24th of February 1920,
Adolf Hitler presented a programme of ideas that would become the basis of the
Nazi Party.

Inside the grand hall, a Bavarian band in lederhosen kept the atmosphere
lively, struggling to be heard over the crowded tables, and the ability of the
Bavarian waitresses to carry a ridiculous number of steins was incredible.
True to form the food was excellent and surprisingly cheap, large servings of
roast pork being the mainstay of the menu; the beers were also extremely good
and quite dangerous, coming as they did in one litre steins.
After a beer or two, my German improved to the point where I was able to
order food and drinks without resorting to English, an achievement that
surprised both me and the waitress who had been witness to my earlier, sober
efforts at the language.
Spending an evening at any one of the numerous beer houses was a very
pleasurable experience, sharing tables with strangers and revelling in the
friendly, social atmosphere.

Munich Trivia: there is no Australian embassy in Munich, only one in Berlin.
But Australia is the only country in the world that erects a temporary embassy
in Munich during Oktoberfest, apparently because a large number of Australians
imbibe too much beer and lose their passports.
I leave it to you to decide if this should be a matter of national shame or
national pride (or even both).

For the tourist stern enough to face the cold and determined enough to escape
the call of the beer halls, there is plenty else to see in Munich.
There are grand old buildings of various vintages, several large parks (that
were disappointingly barren in the middle of winter), numerous market stalls
selling all manner of traditional foodstuffs and crafts.
Even in the poor weather the streets were crowded and the city really felt
alive, nowhere more so than the main squares.
The lengthy Marienplatz is bordered on two sides by the old and new Town
Halls, the Rathaus-Glockenspiel (a large mechanical clock) on the spire of the
new hall being a significant tourist attraction that reenacts two local
stories from the 16th century.

A short walk from here, Karlsplatz is reached by passing through the Karlstor,
which represents the entrance to the historic city centre (back towards the
Marienplatz) and was once the western gate of the medieval fortifications
built under King Ludwig.
From what I saw, Karlsplatz is one of the main places for people to gather,
either to eat at any of the small street-side stalls or to skate on the small
outdoor rink that occupied most of the central space.
True to form, I laced up my skates and hit the ice, weaving through the crowds
of small children and skating hard in a vain effort to warm up.

I warmed up more successfully at the vast German Technological Museum, which
houses exhibitions covering a staggering array of technologies from
aeronautics and space travel to textiles and printing to cameras and clocks.
I spent an entire afternoon wandering from exhibit to exhibit, participating
in a number of interactive demonstrations and admiring just how much effort
had obviously gone into making each room an interesting experience.
Despite having seen only a minor fraction of the works on offer, closing time
approached and I was returned to the streets again, in the pitch black of
night.

Not yet cold enough to contemplate a direct route back to the hostel, I
wandered along the river and strolled past large, elegant buildings and
brightly lit statues.
Coming to the English Gardens, I was witness to an act of amazing
determination, as two surfers in regulation wetsuits took to the icy waters of
a fast-flowing canal, eager to ride the standing wave that holds such an
attraction for surfers that there are many ineffectual "No Surfing" signs
posted along the pathways.
Well before the cold took its toll on the surfers, it had done so on me and I
left them behind, now eager to find refuge in the warmth of the hostel.

The next day I set off on a day trip to F체ssen, a small town south-west of
Munich that is nestled in the foothills of a mountain range, only five
kilometres from the Austrian border and well known for being home to two
fantastic castles.
Hohenschwangau Castle (Castle of the High Swan County) was the childhood
residence of King Ludwig II and was built by his father in the 19th century,
being completed in 1837, while the nearby Neuschwanstein Castle (New Swan
Stone Palace) is the most photographed building in Germany.

The two hour train ride from Munich is significantly cheaper when travelling
in a group, and so I boarded the train with fellow Australians Paran, Michael
and Jonathan, whom I had met the previous night.
Sleeping on and off during the ride, but successfully negotiating the change
of trains, we arrived in town and piled onto a bus that took us to the foot of
the mountain.
The bright yellow Hohenschwangau to our eyes looked more like a grand mansion
than a castle, and we so decided to head directly up the mountain road to
Neuschwanstein, based on glimpses through the forest that (rightly) suggested
it would be the more spectacular of the two.

F체ssen Trivia: Neuschwanstein was built by Kind Ludwig II as an homage to
Richard Wagner.
Now one of Germany's most popular tourist destinations, it can be seen in the
following movies: The Great Escape, Chitty Chitty Bang Bang, Space Balls, and
The Wonderful World of the Brothers Grimm.

The road was covered in a brown slush, a suspicious mixture of snow, dirt and
horse dung --- the road being serviced by a number of horse-drawn carts for
those tourists too lazy to hike up on foot --- and slowly the castle emerged
above the forest, amazingly pretty and shining spectacularly in the bright
sunlight.
We entered the main courtyard, from where there were beautiful view of the
mountainside and across a chasm to a narrow bridge spanning a deep crevasse.
We chose not to fork out a large sum for a tour of the interior and headed
back down the mountain, stopping to buy some deliciously hot quarkbollen
(fried balls of dough with a hint of red wine) to keep us warm as we detoured
from the main path to reach Mariesbrucke, the bridge spanning the crevasse.
Ignoring a large danger sign and jumping a barrier, we made our way to the
bridge where my fear of heights kicked in and prevented me from edging out
very far onto the bridge, but even so the view of the castle was simply
amazing.

We returned to town to find that we had missed the bus back to the train
station --- we had forgotten to look at the Sunday timetable --- and we waited
for the next bus at a nearby restaurant, armed with a good local dark beer.
When we returned to the bus stop we ran into Natalie, whom I had met
previously in Stockholm several months ago.
To drive home just how small this world is, it transpired that Natalia had
attended the same high school as Paran, Michael and Jonathan, an amazing
triangle of chance encounters.
These are the small miracles that occur with such incredible frequency when
travelling.

Having enjoyed my time in Bavaria, my next stop was to be Prague.
There was a small hitch in this plan when I arrived at the Munich train
station to purchase a ticket, because the lady behind the counter did not
speak a single word of English.
Sober as I was, my previous alcohol-assisted efforts to speak German must have
had some lasting effect, since I was able to convey my destination, the
time and date of my train, and the cost of the ticket.
I am certain my German was in no way grammatically correct, but the lady was
nonetheless impressed with my efforts.
I got a huge kick out of this success and I boarded my train to Prague on a
high, looking forward to finding out what the Czech Republic had to offer.
