---
layout: post
title: Lake Bled
category: travel
tags: ['Europe 08/09']
galleries:
    Lake Bled: 'https://photos.app.goo.gl/c5aEh1MtkKHC6oto8'
---

The small resort town of Bled sits at one end of the small Lake Bled, which is
essentially surrounded by low and densely-wooded mountains.
Arriving in mid January, the town and the surrounding land were covered in
snow and ice, the sky predominantly hidden behind a thick blanket of dark,
stormy clouds.
In summer it teems with tourists from all over Europe --- all manner of water
sports and lots of good hiking are available --- while in winter Bled is
mostly a ski resort.
Although it did have the feel of a resort town, Bled is intimately small and
not over-developed, so it was quite a pleasant place to spend a few days.

Bled trivia #1: At the centre of Lake Bled is an island, home to the small and
beautiful Assumption of Mary Pilgrimage Church that stands on the grounds of
an ancient temple consecrated to Živa, the Slavic goddess of love and
fertility.
There are 99 steps here, and a local wedding tradition is that the husband
must carry his bride up these steps while she remains completely silent.
I'm not sure what this implies about married life in Slovenia.

Travelling from Český Krumlov to Lake Bled involves crossing Austria, so
Justin and I had many hours to sit back and enjoy the view from our train
window --- as the train wove its way through the Alps we were able to admire
the narrow valleys and craggy mountains, many of the smaller peaks home to
tiny castles and churches.
Arriving in Bled late in the afternoon, we checked in at a hostel and went to
a nearby pub for a traditional Slovenian dinner.
The food was excellent and cheap (as was the local beer) and it was an easy
decision to adopt the pub as our "local" for the duration of our stay.
Coming from the Czech Republic, the quality of service was also a revelation;
the waiter was very helpful and eager to recommend traditional dishes for us,
he even gave us complementary shots of some truly excellent home-made
blueberry schnapps.

Having started our stay in Bled on a good note, we also had the good fortune
to share a room with Lucy, a British journalist who had come from Budapest
(where she had met Sally, one of the Australians from Cesky Krumlov, once
again proving just how small this world is).
Around 6am the next morning, Lucy had the unenviable task of kicking a drunk
Irishman out of our room: we must have left the door unlocked that night and
this man mistakenly thought it was his room, climbing into the only vacant bed
and beginning to snore very loudly.
Stirred from my slumber, I blearily watched Lucy wake him up, drag him out of
bed, let forth a verbal barrage and send him on his way.
Thank goodness for Lucy!

A combination of this nocturnal disturbance and a layover of the relaxed
environment of Český Krumlov conspired to keep us in the hostel until 1pm,
cooking a slow and lazy breakfast.
The three of us finally set forth to walk around Lake Bled, unperturbed by the
thick mist and dark clouds.
To our disappointment we saw that the lake was not entirely frozen; my plan to
skate to the tiny island at the lake's centre was immediately dashed.
Having seen several people walk on a frozen section of the lake, however, we
later set foot on the same region of ice and carefully shuffled out about
twenty metres from the shore.
All of a sudden an alarming, cracking noise shattered the misty silence and a
Canadian voice could be heard: "that's the sort of sound you don't want to
hear!"
In stark contrast to our tentative foray outwards, we bolted back to the
safety of the shore and leapt onto reassuringly solid ground.
So much for skating on Lake Bled.

Bled trivia #2: The lake is hosted the world rowing championships in 1966,
1979 and 1989, and will host them again in 2011.
One small grandstand on the lakeside is testament to this history.

Continuing our way around the lake, the remainder of the walk thankfully
proved less exciting.
A severe concrete building could be seen jutting out from the mountainside
above the lake, and we were able to reach it on foot, navigating through the
grounds of a seemingly-abandoned hotel.
The building turned out to be a cafe, its excellent location giving beautiful
views of the lake and the surrounding mountains.
Supported by 30m pillars as the land fell away to the shore, somebody was
brave enough to edge out onto a narrow ledge that stood out high above the
lake.
It was not me.
We then completed the circuit of the lake and arrived in town, sodden due to
the passing traffic that hurtled through several deep puddles on the road.

Our destination was a local cafe, where we would try a traditional pastry for
which Bled is famous.
This vanilla-and-cream pastry is locally known as "kremšnita" or "kremna
rezina", deriving from the German "cremeschnitte" that literally means "cream
slice".
The pastry was, by all appearances, a custard slice with an additional layer
of cream that was just as thick as the custard layer.
It was a fantastic (if heart-stopping) dish, and the posh restaurant decor and
fancy attire of the waiters did not deter Justin or I from licking our plates
clean.
Once again, the evening hours were spent sampling more traditional Slovenian
food and enjoying the local dark beer at our favourite haunt.

Bled trivia #3: the efforts of Swiss naturopath Arnold Rikli led to Bled
becoming a popular European health resort in the 19th century, where the clean
air and good weather could reputedly heal people and cure sickness.
It strikes me as odd that this health-resort town is also home to a pastry
that is surely an homage to calorific suicide.

The weather improved slightly the following day, when Justin, Lucy and I
visited the ancient castle that looks down at the lake at the town of Bled
from a rocky outcrop.
Bled castle (Blejski grad) is the second-most visited attraction in Slovenia
(behind Postojna cave) and it's not hard to see why this is so.
From the castle there are excellent views of the lake and the central island,
and the occasional glimmer of sunlight hints at the beauty that would be
apparent on a warm summer day.
The castle museum contained an interesting view of the history of the region,
but we were disappointed to find that the wine cellar and the curiously named
herb gallery were closed.

After a few hours we were driven back to the hostel in search of warmth as the
weather worsened throughout the course of the day, and the afternoon hours
were spent lounging in from the television.
Later in the evening we set out for the local ice rink, determined to skate on
the indoor rink since the lake itself was not sufficiently frozen.
However, we arrived to discover that the public sessions run only on the
weekends.

Disappointed, we visited the adjacent hockey store and talked to the owner,
who told us that his son plays for the Slovenian national team and was drafted
into the NHL by Buffalo.
Although he played in some preseason games, due to injury he never played an
NHL game and he now plays in France.
After further conversation about Slovenian hockey and the town of Bled, we
once again returned to our favourite Slovenian pub for a final round of beer.
Sitting for the first time in the front bar, we noticed that the roof was
covered in license plates from all over the world, amazingly including every
state of Australia (only the territories ACT and NT were not represented).

The next morning Justin and I boarded yet another train, this time headed for
Vienna.
Possibly due to heavy snowfall on the tracks, we arrived late to Villach and
missed our connecting train.
At the advice of a conductor I boarded another train, but the door closed
before Justin could join me and the train began to pull out of the station.
My anger and frustration at such an untimely parting was only momentary, as
the train reversed to a different platform and was hitched to a second train,
giving Justin a chance to board.

However, the advice of the conductor proved rather poor, as we could have
saved time by waiting at the train station for a much more direct train to
Vienna.
I was also charged an additional €5 for the pleasure of spending several extra
hours train-bound.
We finally arrived in Vienna two hours later than planned and at a different
train station, which would not have been of any concern except that Justin had
arranged for some Austrian friends to meet us.
Thankfully they were still good-natured after a two hour wait, and soon enough
they pulled up outside the station.
Here Justin and I went our separate ways after two weeks of travelling
together, yet another unwelcome parting on this long journey.
And so began my time in Vienna...
